North Dakota or as you may know it South
Dakota you probably don't think about
not North Dakota very much and believe
me they know that in fact one of their
visitor centers even assumes that they
are going to be the last state you'll
visit North Dakota is probably best
known for the 1996 Coen Brothers movie
Fargo and the visitors center can tell
you all about it with pictures and the
film's famous wood chipper on display
visitors who saved the state for their
50th to get a best for last t-shirt and
a certificate okay okay just a couple of
things there first you do know what that
wood chipper was used for rites that was
used to grind up Steve Buscemi and
secondly best for last is a
heartbreaking slogan you just one step
away from having it be North Dakota look
we know but the facts North Dakota is so
upbeat about its own lack of popularity
is quintessentially Midwestern people
from North Dakota are so kind and so
wholesome a few years back they actually
had billboards by the roadside reading
be kind and be polite and that says
something wonderful about them just as
it says something awful about me as the
citizens of New York City that my first
reaction to seeing a billboard reading
be polite is cue don't tell me what to
do yourself be polite
the point is North Dakota had gotten
used to being ignored but a few years
ago this happened North Dakota with the
big shale oil boom North Dakota's oil
production may have written 10,000
barrels a day this is the California
Gold Rush but in North Dakota in the
21st century yes like Channing Tatum
North Dakota suddenly turned out to be a
lot more interesting once it was covered
in oil so over the last decade the
state's back in shale formation is
produced in oil booms so large it's
helped cut the amount of oil we import
in half and think about that North
Dakota has done almost as much to reduce
our dependence on foreign oil as you did
when you bike to work that one time and
at its peak this album produced
thousands of jobs and millions of
dollars in wealth it was such a dramatic
shift ABC has a new drama set in the
Bakken in the world of oil on one name
reigns supreme here you're either with
Briggs or you're out you think I'm just
gonna toss you the keys to the kingdom
and watch you drive it over the cliff
sometimes
to get filthy rich blood and oil Sundays
this fall yes
on Sunday in the ultimate miracle the
oil boom brought Don Johnson back and a
Don Johnson television show is as rare
as a solar eclipse and like a solar
eclipse
you really shouldn't look directly at it
but but Don Johnson is not the only
reason that this show is a little
outdated the price of oil has dropped in
the last year and companies have slowed
down expansion of new wells but when the
price rises again the boom is expected
to return so maybe let's use this pause
to take stock of what the hell just
happened to North Dakota because for all
the good the oil industry has done for
the state it has not been without cost
for a start it's taken a massive toll on
their environment last year the New York
Times found that since 2006 18 million
gallons of oils and chemicals have
spilled leaked or misted into the air
daddy's a quantity of lubricants and
toxins seldom found outside of a John
Mayer pool party and equally difficult
to clean and that's that's saying
something and spills of oil and salt
water can have disastrous consequences
just listen to a couple of farmers
who've had their land impacted by this
when things go bad and when saltwater
happens you can't see it initially so
years down the road it shows up and it's
devastating something should have been a
lot done Walker
Darwin Peterson farms the land around
here and says this land now is out of
production as long as he can foresee it
pretty well he owned it
look there are times when it's
acceptable to destroy farmlands like
when you're a child from Krypton looking
for a place to crash land or you're a
bunch of racist baseball ghosts looking
for a place to play but this is not one
of those times but the danger to land is
only just the beginning as a reporter
full reveal found when she investigated
worker deaths in the entire backand
region since 2006 at least 74 workers
have died in the Bakken oil field that
means that on average someone dies every
6 weeks in the Bakken oil fields a death
every six weeks is what you do to keep
your soap opera on the air in real life
that is king of horrifying
now you might hope employers would do
everything in their power to minimize
those risks but that does not always
seem to be the case just listen to this
one worker whose job involves lowering
explosives into the earth and detonating
them describe his schedule I work a
twenty and ten twenty days on ten days
off the longest I've ever been out on a
jobsite is sixty nine hours straight
sixty nine hours straight yep so that
sounds like it could be dangerous yeah
definitely it's a ticking time bomb
really he worked 69 hours straight
handling explosives you should be
allowed to work that long handling
frozen yogurt that is not what I ordered
Ricky that's a handful of sprinkles with
your watch in it go home and rest I want
to speak to a manager but the problem is
there are a few incentives for companies
to actively care about this we do have
federal regulators like OSHA but
unfortunately not only have they
themselves conceded that their general
regulations used for oil and gas are
inadequate but the odds of them ever
turning up to inspect a worksite in
North Dakota are pretty slim OSHA only
has nine full-time compliance officers
for North Dakota and according to some
estimates it would take decades for OSHA
to inspect every workplace in the state
only nine compliance offices that is
terrible and it's actually even worse
because that clip is out of date and
they come
we only have eight and incidentally
those eight have to cover both North and
South Dakota and look there are plenty
of things that having eight of would be
fine in the Dakotas water parks sure
eight is plenty restaurants that serve
lutefisk eight is seven more than enough
but when you're talking about safety
inspectors for oil wells you can Ollie
Swan to be in double digits and given
all of this perhaps it shouldn't be
surprising when tragedy strikes as it
did four years ago at a well owned by a
company called Oasis petroleum some
tragic news from Western North Dakota
one man is killed and three are injured
at an oil well explosion a Wisconsin man
died at the scene three other men were
transported to the Wilson hospital to be
treated for severe burns now that is the
sort of local news story that you watch
feel briefly sad about and then forget
as soon as they get to their final story
about a squirrel who can play ping-pong
but but remember that was a fatal
accident and one of the workers who died
was a 21 year old named Brendan Wagner
and for those who worked alongside him
their lives were never the same jebediah
stanphill was working on a nearby rig
and rushed over and I go out there and
ask him where everybody's at now maybe
were there and he just says Derek man's
dead the derrick man is dead that's when
I looked up and I saw what I've later
find out is Brendan burning in the dirt
one other worker died another lost his
legs and later committed suicide it was
the deadliest accident in the Bakken in
the last decade now I know you're sad at
this point but brace yourself because
you were about to get angry because
after the accident
OSHA visited the work site and found it
was missing several important safety
features including flame retardant
clothing and a safety slide now you
might think as owners of that well Oasis
would come under a lot of scrutiny from
OSHA but you would be wrong about that
how come Oh Asus wasn't held accountable
for this accident Oasis doesn't have
exposed employees on the job site rather
they hired a subcontractor now that way
might sound like a bunch of legalese but
very important oh it doesn't sound like
a bunch of legalese it sounds like a
bunch of complete but it's
actually true oasis technically had no
employees there that day and let me
explain how that happened rather than
hiring employees companies like Oasis
hire subcontractors in this case a
company called Carlson well service who
employ the workers instead and if you're
thinking well surely Oasis must have had
someone there to supervise the work site
yes they did but he wasn't an oasis
employee either he was an independent
contractor a so-called company man
working for another firm hired by Oasis
called Mitchell's oilfield service so
because os's had their company man who
didn't work for the company overseeing
the work site and their subcontractor
overseeing its own workers that meant
that technically no one working on Oh a
sis's well worked for a racist that day
and that is a magic trick so shitty it's
amazing
Criss Angel didn't come out and shout
Mindfreak at the end of it
I gotcha everyone I'm 9th rock here and
to be clear
Oasis was not found at fault for this
accident how could they be in their deal
with Coulson they made sure to say that
Carlson had the authority to control and
direct the performance and safety of the
work and then and this is true wrote
company is interested only in the
results obtained and look bad things
tend to happen when you're interested
only in the results obtained that is a
policy that leads to a woman trying to
lose 15 pounds for her wedding day st.
kitts the juice cleanse isn't working
get me some heroin I'm fitting in that
virile way I don't care anymore now I
should point out Oh ASA Swanton us to
say they did absolutely nothing wrong
and also that they have added new safety
measures since the accident essentially
saying their system was always fine and
that's why they have now completely
fixed it and look subcontracting and
workplace accidents are not unique to
North Dakota what is unique to North
Dakota is the level of regulatory
friendliness to oil companies something
that there
immensely charismatic governor likes to
describe like this we have created a
friendly business climate in North
Dakota for taxes and insurance rates are
low the regulatory environment is very
reasonable North Dakotans are friendly
toward business and will work hard to
help their employers be successful he's
making North Dakota sound like a magical
pro-business utopia like Willy Wonka's
chocolate factory which come to think of
it had about the same safety record as
North Dakota's oil fields now now we'll
think back it was about the same
body-count not kidding about the
friendly business climate because
governor Dalrymple himself heads up the
three-person industrial commission that
oversees the majority of spills and to
give you a sense of the type of
oversight they provide last year the New
York Times found that one of the biggest
oil producers in the area
Continental Resources which have spilled
1.6 million gallons since 2006 had been
fined only two hundred and twenty-two
thousand dollars which would be bad
enough if those fines had not then been
reduced down to just $20,000 because and
this is amazing the commission typically
settles for about 10 percent of the
assessed penalties oil companies in
North Dakota pay for their mistakes the
same way that four-year-olds pay for
their toys very rarely and when they do
it's mostly just a symbolic gesture just
just give the man the dollar Jason give
him the dollar I know it really cost $10
I just want him to feel like he's doing
something now another member of that
Commission Lynn Helms claims this system
actually works well due to the
conditions that they attach they agree
to cut a check for that amount
unappealable if a repeat violation
occurs during that 1 to 5 year time
period
it's like probation and it really
changes behavior tom says looking back
on five years of data no companies have
had a repeat violation really no
companies have had a repeat violation
that is one hell of a claim let's take a
look at that shall we
because
deals typically stipulate that a company
must have no same or substantially
similar violations within a year so
let's look at petrol hunt they got a 90
percent discount on a 25 thousand dollar
fine last year after an incident in
which they spilled over 3000 gallons of
oil and yet five months later which and
this is true is less than a year this
happened the State Health Department is
responded to an oil spill near the town
of Keene in McKenzie County Petro Hunt
says about 600 barrels of oil leaked
from a well and it was not contained on
site 600 barrels of oil that is over
25,000 gallons how is that not
substantially similar it's basically the
exact same thing only worse it's the
hangover 2 of oil spills it's wrong and
and North Dakota's friendly regulations
even extend to campaign finance the oil
industry is actually the top political
contributor in the state which isn't
that surprising what is surprising is
that as one state legislator pointed out
in North Dakota you don't even have to
spend campaign funds on your campaigns
when I first ran and visiting with
candidates I always asked if you had any
money left in the campaign account at
the end of the campaign what do you do
with it and one of the most fascinating
hatches I received was well he put it in
your checking account Cheers at the end
coming now I know I know his flannel bow
tie is extremely distracting but what
he's saying is horrifying in North
Dakota you could theoretically find
yourself saying well I gave my state Rep
money for TV ads and yard signs but
instead he blew it all on a full-length
mink coat and the glasses Buddy Holly
was wearing when he died that's not what
it was thought you look good but it's
not what it was for but you do look good
and I am NOT saying legislators in North
Dakota do that but that's a system you
might want to state Ethics Commission to
look into except for the fact that and
this really should not surprise you by
now North Dakota does not have an Ethics
Commission which is pretty much
guaranteeing that FIFA
just found the location for its new
international North Dakota they're
coming
and finally North Dakota also allows the
oil industry to use something called
indemnification to avoid civil liability
and to show you how that works let's go
back to our way sees petroleum and that
deadly explosion we mentioned earlier as
you know Oasis didn't have to pay any
fine for that accident however they did
wind up agreeing to pay Brendon Wagner's
family an undisclosed settlement except
not entirely because they also had an
indemnification clause in their contract
with Carlson stating that in cases like
the accident that killed Brendon Carlson
would halt
Oasis harmless against all claims
without limits and without regard to the
cause or the negligence or fault of any
party so theoretically even if Oasis
were negligent and found completely at
fault
Carlson's insurance company could find
itself paying a chunk of Oasis's
settlement which in this case it did and
sure technically the family gets paid
either way but who pays matters payments
are deterrence and think of it like this
if every time you parked in front of a
fire hydrant someone else got a ticket
you'd probably be a lot less inclined to
drive around the block looking for open
parking spaces and I understand that
North Dakota wants to be business
friendly and that plenty of businesses
using demonstration clauses but the
danger involved in the oil industry
makes it a little different which is why
some other states ban or limit
indemnification clauses in the oil
industry even Texas limits them Texas
Texas
and Texas is so loosely regulated their
speed limit is let er rip
and their age of consent is just a
drawing of a wink listen listen please
lick North Dakota
please listen I get it you're friendly
and that's fantastic
you had billboard saying be polite and
that's wonderful
but this has gone too far oil companies
need to be held accountable when bad
things happen a fine is no good if it's
a drop in the bucket
especially because knowing these
companies now they'll probably miss that
bucket and then somehow find a way to
make someone else pay to clean up the
mess so please I would like to
suggest to you a new approach hey North
Dakota we know you're a friendly place
full of nice people doing nice things
you like to shake hands smile and for
some reason built a giant turtle out of
wheel rims by the highway that's a king
awesome turtle North Dakota nice job but
lately we've become concerned that oil
companies have been taking advantage of
you and sure they brought lots of jobs
and money to your state and that's nice
but jobs and money shouldn't come at the
expense of your land or your life and
right now in some ways you're less
regulated than Texas King Texas you're
less regulated than whatever this is so
listen just for once it might be time to
stop being polite and start getting mad
even madder North Dakota no much madder
than that
holy don't you possum for the rest
of you yes that's better get pissed
remember people are dying and land is
getting ruined
so come on North Dakota
let the ferocious animals looking
beneath your frozen exteriors out for
once in your goddamn lives do it and
we're asking you in the most North
Dakotan way we know how with an actual
billboard on one of your actual byways
saying be angry follow the horse little
wood please so please be angry North
Dakota be angry
[Applause]
you